\documentclass[12pt]{colt2019}

% The following packages will be automatically loaded:
% amsmath, amssymb, natbib, graphicx, url, algorithm2e

\title{The value of unlabeled data}
\usepackage{times}

\coltauthor{%
 \Name{Alexander Golovnev} \Email{abc@sample.com}\\
 \addr Address 1
 \AND
 \Name{D\'avid P\'al} \Email{davidko.pal@gmail.com}\\
 \addr Address 2
 \AND
 \Name{Bal\'azs Szorenyi} \Email{??@verizonmedia.com}\\
 \addr Address 3
}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
It has been shown that the amount of labeled examples to probably aproximately
learn a binary classifier decreases if the algorithm has access to the unlabeled
data. In particular, for the class of projections over $\{0,1\}^n$ there exists
a family of probability distributions such that learning any target concept with
access to unlabeled data requires only constant number examples but requires
$\Omega(\log n)$ labeled examples in the worst case without the access to
unlabeled data. It remains an open problem to construct such distributions and
analyze the gap between the sample complexities for other important concept
classes such as half-spaces, disjunctions, conjuctions, monotone disjunctions,
monotone conjuctions and axis parallel rectangles.
\end{abstract}

\begin{keywords}
sample complexity, semi-supervised learning, probably approximately correct learning
\end{keywords}

\section{Introduction}

Worst case sample complexity of probably approximately correct (PAC) learning is
very well understood~\cite{} and it is known to be $\Theta(\frac{d +
\log(1/\delta)}{\epsilon})$ where $d$ is the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension,
$\epsilon$ is the accuracy parameter and $\delta$ is the confidence parameter.
Similarly, the sample complexity of learning under a fixed distribution is
reasonably well understood~\cite{} and it is between $O(\frac{\log N_\epsilon +
\log(1/\delta)}{\epsilon})$. and $\Omega(???)$.

Sample complexity of learning under a fixed distribution depends on the
distribution, while worst case complexity of PAC learning does not. See figure.
For some distributions the sample complexity of fixed distribution learning is
much lower than the (worst-case) PAC sample complexity.

%% TODO: Add figure here.

Existing algorithms for learning under a fixed distribution depend in a
non-trivial way on the distribution in question. On the other hand PAC learning
algorithms do \emph{not} depend on it. It is thus a natural question whether or
not the access to unlabeled data is necessary in order to match the lower sample
complexity with the access to unlabeled data.

This question was studied by \cite{}. They have shown that having access to
unlabeled data is beneficial for the class of projections over $\{0,1\}^n$. More
specifically, there exists a family of distributions under which any target
projection is learnable with constant number of samples, however any learner
that does not have access to the unlabeled data needs $\Omega(\log n)$ examples
in the worst case.

It remains an open problem to analyze other concept classes of interest.
Specifically, it is unknown what is the gap, if any, for the classes of
half-spaces and axis parallel rectangles over $\R^n$, disjunctions, conjuctions,
monotone disjunctions and monotone conjuctions over $\{0,1\}^n$. While sample
complexity depends on the accuracy parameter $\epsilon$ and confidence parameter
$\delta$, we are more interested in the dependency on dimension
$n$.\footnote{For the above-mentioned concept classes the Vapnik-Chervonenkis
dimension is $\Theta(n)$. For projections Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension is
$\Theta(\log n)$.}

We conjecture that there is gap at least $\Omega(\log n)$, but it is possible
that the gap is as high as $\Omega(n^\alpha)$ for some $\alpha \in (0,1]$. In
order to show the existence of a gap, one must construct a family of
distributions such that fixed distribution learning has low sample complexity
but worst-case sample complexity without knowledge of the distribution is
higher.

\end{document}
